---
title: 'Beginner issues with Jekyll on GitHub Pages'
tags: Jekyll
layout: article
---

Yes, there is some documentation but, honestly, the official Jekyll and GitHub Pages documentation is not the most helpful to a beginner. How do I know? I’m a beginner, and I had to find most of the answers to my questions on other websites. I’d like to consolidate them into one place. Here are some things I ran into trying to publish my blog on GitHub Pages with Jekyll for the first time. Hopefully it comes in handy.

###GitHub Pages

---

###Enter the Terminal
You need the Terminal to do a couple things.

- For one, installing Jekyll. The instructions are [here](), but they leave out a very important part. What if you get an error like `you don’t have permission to blah, blah, blah` when you try to install? In that case, you probably need to add `sudo` to the beginning of the install command, ie `sudo gem install jekyll`. You should be prompted to enter your administrator password, which will give that command the rights to do whatever it wants. With great power comes great responsibility, so use `sudo` carefully.
- Also, to run Jekyll, you need to initialize it in a Terminal window. It’s not hard, just run `jekyll —server` while in your local site directory, `username.github.com`. If you don’t want to type in the directory path every time, you can do two things: 1)  type `cd` and then drag that folder from a Finder window to the Terminal window and it will convert it to a path, or 2) if you’re using the Espresso app for your coding work, right-click on the folder in the left-hand pane and select _Open in Terminal_. Then start the Jekyll server.
- As you get further into using Jekyll, you may want to add other utilities, like additional rubygems. If you want to check and see if you have a gem already installed, simply run `gem query --local` in a new Terminal window. This will list your installed rubygems.

###Jekyll, YAML, and the Liquid templating system
Jekyll itself is relatively simple. But that doesn’t keep things from getting confusing at the beginning. That’s because you need things like: a configuration file, YAML headers in files, and Liquid template commands to pull things together and have them processed correctly. I learned a few things with some trial-and-error.

####Jekyll configuration

The `_config.yml` configuration file doesn’t need to be complicated. Here’s what the [default looks like](), but it can have less settings than that if you’d like. I took the default and only made three changes:

1. `auto: true` This keeps Jekyll running continuously so that I can make changes and see them update automatically when I’m testing things out on my local copy of the site.
2. `paginate: #-of-posts` If you add this setting, you can dictate how many posts are included in each page. Remember, with Jekyll there is no database. There will be no queries made to fetch the next # of posts. Flat HTML files will be published with the number of posts you’ve set. If this line is not added, all posts will be written to a single page by default.
3. `permalink:` This is used to globally change the published folder structure of your posts. Read more about the different options [here]().

####YAML Front Matter is easy.

Here’s a sample header that I use:

	---
	title: Title of Post
	source: http://reference-source-url
	tags:
	- tag 1
	- tag 2
	layout: link
	---

There were only a couple things I needed to learn:

1. A `date:` field is only necessary if you want to override the date in the filename.
2. If you want the include special characters in your page title, you need to wrap it in apostrophes:

		title: 'Post Title: *Special* Character Edition!'
	
	Don't use more apostrophes in the title, use the proper `‘ ’` single quote characters. Hint: that's **option+]** and **option+shift+]** on the Mac keyboard.
3.	It's okay to add custom variables. I use `source:` to hold the url of an outside link I'm reblogging. You'll see it in action in the next section.

####Sorting and filtering posts with Liquid

The default behavior of Jekyll (which uses the [Liquid template system]()) is to publish pages in chronological order, newest first. I do not know how to change this—I am of zero help here. But since newest-to-oldest is likely the order that 99% of bloggers want, including myself, I saw no reason to go looking for trouble. What you may want is the ability to filer your post requests. Perhaps you want to create a page for posts of just one category. Or, like me, different post types may need different formatting. For example, I wanted my link posts to act like a true link blog—the title is a link to the source url. But any quote, article, or chat post would have the title wrapping in a blank link because they have no source url. So,

	{% for post in site.posts %}
		<h2>{% post.title %}</h2>
		{{ content }}
	{% endfor %}

which basically gives you a dump of the contents of all your site posts with titles in one page, is not going to work for you. What we need is to use conditional `if` statements and a more limiting call then `site.posts`. But how do we isolate our posts by type? Well, if you're using the `layout:` tag in your YAML header, you've got something to isolate with already. You could also use a custom tag up there, too. I'm going to use the layout:

	{% for post in site.posts %}
		{% if post.layout == 'link' %}
			<h2><a href="{ post.source }">{% post.title %}</a></h2>
			{{ content }}
		{% elsif post.layout == 'quote' %}
			{{ content }}
		{% endif %}
	{% endfor %}

So I did a few things here. I added an `if ==` statement to isolate all posts that had a layout tag set as `link`. With just those posts selected, I can specify what and how their contents are returned. Remember, `post.source` returns the url I've stored in the custom `source:` variable in the post's YAML header. You could just as easily use `post.url` instead to return a permalink url to your post.

Since link posts aren't the only ones I have, I used an `elsif ==` statement to include other post types—in the above case, quote posts, which I didn't want to have a linked title. Continue to use `elsif` statements for all the different post types you use. Oh, note the spelling—no 'e' in _elsif_ here. That tripped me up at first and I couldn't figure out why the other posts weren't showing up. 

####Pagination

First, pagination only works in HTML files, not Markdown files. If your target page is `index.md`, change it to `index.html`. Next, you need to pick how many posts per page you want and add that to your configuration file. Let's say it's 10:

	paginate: 10

That was easy. Now we have to tell Jekyll when we want to “invoke” pagination using the `paginator` variable. So in our main index page, we would change:

	{% for post in site.posts %}
	
to be

	{% for post in paginator.posts %}

Still easy. Now the main pages will only contain 10 posts at a time. Adding *previous* and *next* links only require a little bit more:

	{% if paginator.previous_page %}
		<a href="/page{{paginator.previous_page}}">Previous</a>
	{% endif %}
	
	{% if paginator.next_page %}
		<a href="/page{{paginator.next_page}}">Next</a>
	{% endif %}

The one caveat is that Jekyll produces a site structure of `/page2/` and `/page3/` etc., but does not create a `/page1/`. So, as-is, above code will get you everywhere except from the second page back to the main page. We have to add a condition to look for that one situation first and then proceed normally:

	{% if paginator.previous_page %}
		{% if paginator.previous_page == 1 %}
			<a href="/">Previous</a>
		{% else %}
			<a href="/page{{paginator.previous_page}}">Previous</a>
		{% endif %}
	{% endif %}
	
	{% if paginator.next_page %}
		<a href="/page{{paginator.next_page}}">Next</a>
	{% endif %}	

That's it. Not bad at all.

###Making things more complicated, for efficiency sake.

---

###Drafts

Sometimes you want to save a post as a draft, such as when you're typing a beginner's guide to Jekyll speedbumps and can't finish it all in one sitting. You want to keep your drafts in your site structure, but you don't want them published yet. How to do? There are a few options.

For one, remember that Jekyll doesn't convert files in folders that begin with `_`, except for those directly in `_posts`. So you could create a `_drafts` folder right inside of `_posts` (or in the site root) and Jekyll won't touch it. That's what I do. Then, when I'm finished, I update the date in the filename and drag it into the posts folder.

If you want to keep drafts in the same folder as all rest you have a few options:

1.	Enter a future date in the filename and then set your configuration file to `future: false`. This keeps posts with future dates from being published.
2. If you want to keep the filename date current, you can override it with the `date:` variable in your draft's YAML Front Matter header instead.
3. Don't want to mess with future dates at all? You can also use the variable `published: false` in the post header.

There's an advantage and disadvantage to future-dating posts. The advantage is that if you want to preview the draft in your site, all you have to do is change your config file to `future: true`. You can preview the post and then change the setting back to remove the published file. The disadvantage is that it can be harder to keep track of your drafts.

###CSS

---

###Markdown parsing

The default Markdown parser included for Jekyll is Makuru. It's a good start, but you'll soon run into issues. For instance, it has some real trouble with `< >` and `[ ]` brackets. Creating a link or footnote is fine, but try and use square brackets on their own, ie. _[sic]_, and you'll get a parsing error. The text may render, but the brackets will get stripped out. You probably want to upgrade the Markdown parsing engine to a different one. [Rdiscount]() seems to be well regarded—and it's as simple as:

	sudo gem install rdiscount
	
Then just be sure to change your configuration file to match your preference:

	markdown: rdiscount
	
Things should go a little smoother.

Code blocks can also be a bit touchy, depending on where you use them. For instance, if you place a code block after a list item, it likely won't work out the way you expect the first time. Typically a Markdown compliant code block is created by indenting with four spaces or one tab. However, to align the block with a list item, as seen above in the YAML header example, you need to indent by two tabs. What if you don't want the code block part of the list item? Well, uh, that's not likely to work out for you without picking a hack:

1.	Use code fencing: ` ```code here``` `. The problem is that fencing will kill your line breaks, so it's only useful for one line of code.
2. Add a blank HTML entity between the list item and the code block, such as a  comment `<!-- !-->`. This will clear the list and allow you to use code blocks normally.

Remember, this only comes into play when a code block directly follows a list. Hopefully that doesn't come up too often.